---
title: "Wu Xinbo on Blinken's China Visit"
date: "2023-07-03"
sourceUrl: "https://www.readingthechinadream.com/blog/july-03rd-2023/"
---

​New on the site this week:  
  
The big news is that as of July 1, 2023, _I have retired_ from the Université de Montréal. This was my choice; I am in great health and very excited about the future. I absolutely plan to continue the website and thought that this might be an appropriate moment to ask for contributions from readers to defray the costs of running it. So I added a [contribution button](https://checkout.square.site/merchant/MLGETK1CC1WBQ/checkout/IOT3SF57JGIJVSITWWZYGZIV) to the site. This button is more easily accessed from the website than from your phone, although if you feel that you must contribute while driving to work or crossing the street, you can click on the three buttons in the top right of your cell and choose “desktop site,” from which you can see the button. I stress that this contribution is _voluntary_ and that I will not bombard you with messages about it. Thanks. More about my retirement plans in future updates.  
  
New translations this time include:  
  
An [interview](/wu-xinbo-on-blinkens-trip-to-china/) with Wu Xinbo on Secretary of State Blinken’s visit to China, a moderately hopeful if realistic view that I think resonates with a good number of Chinese;  
  
A [talk](/jiang-shigong-on-world-empire-and-civilization/) by Jiang Shigong on the decline of the American empire, the rise of “civilizational states” (Russia, Turkey, India) and how Chinese socialism will save the 20th century from a coming clash of civilizations;  
  
An [interview](/interview-with-chizuko-ueno-and-li-yinhe/) with Japanese feminist Chizuko Ueno and Chinese sexologist Li Yinhe. This is part of a huge “Ueno moment” in China – in the past few months, 9 of her books have been published in Chinese and some 1 million copies purchased. This is surely Chinese feminism finding a way to make its voice heard even as the movement’s leaders are silenced or exiled.  
  
If you missed me on Kaiser Kuo’s Sinica podcast on June 8, you can give a belated listen [here](https://thechinaproject.com/podcast/david-ownby-of-readingthechinadream-com-on-the-intellectual-mood-in-china/). That interview earned me another with Kalavinka Advisors which is available [here](https://kalavinkaadvisors.com/publication/kalavinka-viewpoints-29/) (a written interview, so the vibe is a bit different).  
  
Enjoy! More soon!  
  